This (link: glossary/climate-impact-assessment text: climate impact) assessment presents (link: glossary/projections text: projections) of the land area affected by droughts and the number of people exposed to droughts in {country.name}, based on {nb_impact_models} different (link: glossary/global-hydrological-models text: global hydrological models) (GHMs) and {nb_climate_models} different global (link: glossary/climate-models text: climate models)(GCMs) participating in [ISIMIP](https://www.isimip.org/).

Here, (link: glossary/droughts text: droughts) refer to a situation where the monthly (link: glossary/soil-moisture text: soil moisture) conditions fall short of the 2.5th percentile (glossary/link: variable-monthly-threshold text: variable monthly threshold) for at least 7 consecutive months. To calculate the total land area affected by drought per country the land area exposed to drought is summed up across all  grid cells belonging to {country.name}. Multiplying, at each grid cell, with the number of people living in the grid cell yields the number of people exposed to drought.

We analyze the land area affected by droughts and the number of people exposed to droughts at different (link: glossary/levels-of-global-warming text: levels of global warming)(0, 1, 2, and 3 degrees Celsius) and during different time periods. We cover the time before (link: glossary/anthropogenic-climate-change text: anthropogenic climate change) started (conventionally set at 1850), present-day (2001-2020), mid-century (2041-2060) and end-of-century (2081-2100). We compare the later periods against the climate conditions before anthropogenic climate change started (1850). A ranking of countries for each indicator is provided to allow comparison between countries on the basis of their (link: glossary/relative-change text: relative change) in the land area affected or the number of people exposed under different levels of global warming and for various time horizons, compared to conditions before anthropogenic climate change started. Here, a ranking of 1 implies that the country experiences a change in the (link: glossary/indicator text: indicator) that is more than all other ranked countries, whereas a lower ranking entails comparatively less effects due to climate change.

It is important to note that our (link: glossary/future-projections text: future projections) assume that the number of people living in an area, as well as the area’s (link: glossary/land-use text: land use) and (link: glossary/land-cover text: land cover), remain constant to that of the year 2005. This is not necessarily meant to be realistic, but to isolate the influence of climate change from the influence of other changes.

In the key messages we report the results for the (link: glossary/median text: median) of the (link: glossary/model-ensemble text: model ensemble) of global hydrological models providing data to ISIMIP. The median represents the middle of the ensemble, meaning that 50% of the ensemble members provide higher numbers and 50% provide lower numbers. After the key message, which only references the median, you can find the model-specific results in the figures, a discussion of the methodology and the restrictions of the analysis at the end of the article.

### Key messages

* Without human-made greenhouse gas emissions, {land_tc_ov_md_0c}% of {country.apostrophe} land area and {pop_tc_ov_md_0c}% of {country.apostrophe} population would be affected by droughts each year, on average.

* At today’s levels of 1 degrees Celsius of global warming the land area affected is {land_tc_rel_ov_md_1c_times} times as much: {land_tc_rel_ov_md_1c}% of the total land area, while the number of people affected is {pop_tc_rel_ov_md_1c_times} times as much: {pop_tc_ov_md_1c}% of the total population.

* At 2 degrees Celsius of global warming, {country.apostrophe} land area affected by droughts is projected to increase by a factor of {land_tc_rel_ov_md_2c} compared to a world without human-made greenhouse gas emissions, to {land_tc_ov_md_0c}%. Likewise, {country.apostrophe} population exposed to droughts is projected to increase by a factor {pop_tc_rel_ov_md_2c}, to {pop_tc_ov_md_0c}%.

* Following the higher-emissions scenario (RCP6.0) which can entail over 3 degrees Celsius of global warming by the end of the century (2081-2100), this factor is projected to reach {land_rcp60_far_future_times} for the land area affected to droughts (to {land_rcp60_far_future_times}%) and {pop_rcp60_far_future_times} for the population exposed to droughts (to {pop_rcp60_far_future}%).

* {country.name} ranks (ranking-value: land-area-affected-by-drought-relative-changes_ISIMIP-projections_versus-temperature-change_{country.code} value: position temperature:2) with regards to its relative change in land area affected by droughts at 2 degrees Celsius of global warming in comparison to a situation without anthropogenic climate change. For the relative change in population exposed to droughts, {country.apostrophe} ranking is (ranking-value: population-exposed-to-drought-relative-changes_ISIMIP-projections_versus-temperature-change_{country.code} value: position temperature:2).

### Results

The figures below shows the relative change in {country.apostrophe} land area affected by and population exposed to droughts in comparison to the time period before anthropogenic climate change. Results are shown both for the (link: glossary/historical-period text: historical time period) and for the (link: glossary/future-projections text: future projections) and can be visualized with regards to their change over time as well as with regards to their change in terms of global warming. Under the ‘change in terms of time’ setting, the change in land area affected by and population exposed to droughts over time is shown for 20-year (link: glossary/time-slices text: time-slices) from 1861-1880 until the end-of-the-century (2081-2100). Under the ‘change in terms of global warming’, the change in land area affected by and population exposed to droughts is shown for 20-year (link: glossary/time-slices text time-slices) representing increasing levels of global warming from 0 degrees Celsius up to 3 degrees Celsius compared to the time period before anthropogenic climate change started.

In both cases, results are shown for all possible combinations of (link: glossary/global-hydrological-models text: global hydrological models) and (link: glossary/global-climate-models text: global climate models) (normal lines) as well as for the median of the model ensemble (thick line). The influence of (link: glossary/inter-annual-variability text: inter-annual variability) on the results is visualized by means of the shaded area in black. This inter-annual variability is only shown for the median model combination. For the future projections and under the ‘change in terms of time’ settings only, an additional distinction is made between the results of two future (link: glossary/emissions-trajectories text: emissions trajectories): a low-emissions trajectory limiting global mean temperature in the 21st century to below 2 degrees Celsius compared to before anthropogenic climate change started, called RCP2.6 (blue lines), and a higher-emissions scenario leading global mean temperature to above 3 degrees Celsius by 2100, compared to pre-climate change conditions, called RCP6.0 (red lines). The shaded areas in blue and red indicate the variety (or spread) in results between all combinations of global hydrological models and global climate models for these two emissions trajectories. A filtering menu top-right of the graph allows the user to select individual emissions trajectories, individual global climate models, and individual global hydrological models for visualization.

By hovering over or clicking on a particular value in the figure additional details, such as the specific global climate model or hydrological used, behind the presented value become available. The visualization below the graph shows, for the selected model run under this time-period or temperature-change level, how {country.name} ranks in comparison to other countries on its relative change in land area affected by or population exposed to droughts.

#### Land area affected by droughts

(line-plot: land-area-affected-by-drought-relative-changes_ISIMIP-projections_versus-temperature-change_{country.code},land-area-affected-by-drought-relative-changes_ISIMIP-projections_versus-timeslices_{country.code} first-temperature: 2 second-scenario: rcp26 second-time: 2141-2160)

Without human-made greenhouse gas emissions, {land_tc_ov_md_0c}% of {country.apostrophe} land area would be affected by droughts each year, on average.

Under the ‘change in terms of global warming’ setting the figure shows that at today’s level of 1 degrees Celsius of global warming {country.apostrophe} land area affected by droughts is, on average, already {land_tc_rel_ov_md_1c_times} times (or {land_tc_rel_ov_md_1c}%) {land_tc_rel_ov_md_1c_times_higher_or_lower} and amount to {land_tc_ov_md_1c}% of the total land area. This level of change ranges from {minimum_land_tc_abs_ov_md_2c}% to {maximum_land_tc_abs_ov_md_2c}% for the individual combinations of global hydrological models and global climate models. At 2 degrees Celsius of global warming, {country.apostrophe} land area affected by droughts is projected to change by a factor of {land_tc_rel_ov_md_2c_times} (or {land_tc_abs_ov_md_2c}%) in comparison to a world without human-made greenhouse gas emissions. Under these conditions, {land_tc_ov_md_2c}% of the total land area would be affected by droughts on a yearly basis, on average. Across the individual combinations of global hydrological models and global climate models this expected level of change ranges from {minimum_land_tc_abs_ov_md_2c}% up to {maximum_land_tc_abs_ov_md_2c}%.

When presenting the ‘change in terms of time’, we find that when following the higher-emissions scenario (RCP6.0) towards the end-of-the-century (equivalent to over 3 degrees Celsius change) would result in a change in the land area affected by droughts of, on average, a factor {land_rcp60_rel_far_future_times} ({land_rcp60_abs_far_future}%), towards: {land_rcp60_far_future}% of the total land area. Following the (link: glossary/climate-mitigation-emissions-scenario text: climate-mitigation emissions scenario)(RCP2.6) towards the end-of-the-century (entailing an average 2.5 degrees Celsius change) would result in a foreseen change in the land area affected by droughts of, on average, a factor {land_rcp26_rel_far_future_times} ({land_rcp26_abs_far_future}%), {land_rcp26_far_future}% of the total land area being affected.

Globally, the land area affected by droughts each year, on average, is {world.land_tc_ov_md_0c}% in a situation without human-made greenhouse gas emissions. At 2 degrees Celsius global warming or by the end-of-the-century under a higher-emissions scenario (RCP6.0) these values are foreseen to increase globally by a factor {world.land_tc_rel_ov_md_2c_times} and {world.land_rcp60_rel_far_future_times}%, respectively.

As such, {country.name} ranks (ranking-value: land-area-affected-by-drought-relative-changes_ISIMIP-projections_versus-temperature-change_{country.code} value: position temperature:2) with regards to its relative change in land area affected by droughts at 2 degrees Celsius of global warming in comparison to a situation without anthropogenic climate change. For the relative change in land area affected by droughts towards the-end-of-the-century under a higher-emissions scenario (RCP6.0), {country.apostrophe} ranking is (ranking-value: land-area-affected-by-drought-relative-changes_ISIMIP-projections_versus-timeslices_{country.code} value: position time:2081-2100 scenario: rcp60).

#### Population exposed to droughts

(line-plot: population-exposed-to-drought-relative-changes_ISIMIP-projections_versus-temperature-change_{country.code},population-exposed-to-drought-relative-changes_ISIMIP-projections_versus-timeslices_{country.code} first-temperature: 2 second-scenario: rcp26 second-time: 2141-2160)

Without human-made greenhouse gas emissions, {pop_tc_ov_md_0c}% of {country.apostrophe} population would be exposed to droughts each year, on average.

Under the ‘change in terms of global warming’ setting the figure shows that at today’s level of 1 degrees Celsius of global warming {country.apostrophe} population exposed to droughts is, on average, already {pop_tc_rel_ov_md_1c_times} times (or {pop_tc_rel_ov_md_1c}%) {pop_tc_rel_ov_md_1c_times_higher_or_lower}: {pop_tc_ov_md_1c}% of the total land area. This level of change ranges from {minimum_pop_tc_abs_ov_md_1c}% to {maximum_pop_tc_abs_ov_md_1c}% for the individual combinations of global hydrological models and global climate models. At 2 degrees Celsius of global warming, {country.apostrophe} population exposed to droughts is projected to change by a factor of {pop_tc_rel_ov_md_2c_times} (or {pop_tc_abs_ov_md_2c}%) in comparison to a world without human-made greenhouse gas emissions. Under these conditions, {pop_tc_ov_md_2c}% of the total population would be exposed to droughts on a yearly basis,          on average. Across the individual combinations of global hydrological models and global climate models this expected level of change ranges from {minimum_pop_tc_abs_ov_md_2c}% up to {maximum_pop_tc_abs_ov_md_2c}%.

When presenting the ‘change in terms of time’, we find that when following the higher-emissions scenario (RCP6.0) towards the end-of-the-century (equivalent to over 3 degrees Celsius change) would result in a foreseen change in the population exposed to droughts of, on average, a factor {pop_rcp60_rel_far_future_times} ({pop_rcp60_abs_far_future}%),{pop_rcp60_far_future}% of the total population. Following the climate-mitigation emissions scenario (RCP2.6) towards the end-of-the-century (entailing an average 2.5 degrees Celsius change) would result in a foreseen change in the population exposed to droughts of, on average, a factor {pop_rcp26_rel_far_future_times} ({pop_rcp26_abs_far_future}%), {pop_rcp26_far_future}% of the total population being exposed.

Globally, the population exposed to droughts each year, on average, is {world.pop_tc_ov_md_0c}% in a situation without human-made greenhouse gas emissions. At 2 degrees of global warming or by the end-of-the-century under a higher-emissions scenario (RCP6.0) these values are foreseen to increase globally by {world.pop_tc_rel_ov_md_2c_times}% and {world.pop_rcp60_rel_far_future_times}% respectively.

As such, {country.name} ranks (ranking-value: population-exposed-to-drought-relative-changes_ISIMIP-projections_versus-temperature-change_{country.code} value: position temperature:2) with regards to its relative change in population exposed to droughts at 2 degrees Celsius of global warming in comparison to a situation without anthropogenic climate change. For the relative change in population exposed to droughts towards the-end-of-the-century under a business-as-usual emissions scenario, {country.apostrophe} ranking is (ranking-value: population-exposed-to-drought-relative-changes_ISIMIP-projections_versus-timeslices_{country.code} value: position time:2081-2100 scenario: rcp60).

### Methodology

#### What do we analyze?

We analyze the land area affected by droughts and the number of people exposed to droughts at different levels of global warming (0, 1, 2, and 3 degrees Celsius) and during different time periods. We cover the time before anthropogenic climate change started (1850), present-day (2001-2020), mid-century (2041-2060) and end-of-century (2081-2100). We compare the later periods against the climate conditions before anthropogenic climate change (1850).

#### How do we calculate where and when a drought occurs?

The calculation has several steps: 1) calculate (link: glossary/soil-moisture text: soil moisture); 2) calculate the 2.5th percentile (glossary/link: variable-monthly-threshold text: variable monthly threshold) value for monthly soil moisture conditions; and 3) evaluate where and when a grid cell is exposed to drought conditions for at least 7 consecutive months. All these steps are detailed below, after a short explanation of the spatial structure on which our models operate.

#### What is the spatial structure of the models?

The models we use cover the whole globe’s land area. The land area is divided into a grid. Each grid cell has a size of 0.5 degrees × 0.5 degrees (latitude by longitude). At the equator, this equals roughly 55 × 55 km; towards the North Pole or South Pole, where the land area covered per grid cell becomes smaller.

#### How is soil moisture calculated?

The calculation is done for each grid cell and each day. Information about temperature, precipitation, solar radiation, and other weather indicators is taken from the global climate models (GCMs) and used as input for the ISIMIP global hydrological models (GHMs). Additional spatial data, such as soil, land cover and water bodies are also inputted. Soil moisture, i.e. the water stored in the soil in liquid or frozen form, is calculated as the difference between the amount of water coming in as rain or snow, and the amount of water going out, either through evapotranspiration from the surface and vegetation, or through percolation of water towards the deeper ground water layers. Global hydrological models include a different representation of the (link: glossary/soil-water-column text: soil water column) with different numbers of soil compartments with varying depths of the soil water layer(s), ranging from one soil water layer with a depth of between 0.1 - 4 meter up to 15 fully resolved soil water layers with a total depth up to 45 meter.

Here, we use (link: glossary/rootzone-soil-moisture text: rootzone soil moisture) estimates, the portion of soil moisture that is within the rooting depth of plants, when directly provided by the global hydrological models. For global hydrological models that do not directly provide rootzone soil moisture conditions, we approximated this variable by integrating soil moisture across multiple soil water layers in order to reach a depth of ~1 meter.

Daily rootzone soil moisture values were finally aggregated into monthly average rootzone soil moisture conditions per grid cell.

#### How is the 2.5th percentile variable monthly threshold calculated?

To distinguish between periods of drought and periods of no drought we applied a (link: glossary/variable-monthly-threshold text: variable monthly threshold) level method over the monthly rootzone soil moisture conditions, using a 2.5th percentile value. Using the pre-industrial scenario as a reference period, we identified at the grid-level, per global hydrological model and global climate model, and for each month individually, the monthly rootzone soil moisture value that represents the 2.5th percentile value. This can be interpret as the monthly rootzone soil moisture condition that is exceeded 39 out of 40 times throughout the full time-period under study. The use of a variable monthly threshold to distinguish drought from periods of no drought allows accounting for seasonal climatology, which is relevant for the management of water resources.

#### How do we know whether a drought occurs?

With these obtained 2.5th percentile variable monthly threshold values, we then identify for the different climate change scenarios how often monthly rootzone soil moisture conditions fall under this threshold. To identify prolonged drought events, and omit incidental occurrences of droughts lasting only a short period of time, we applied a six-month threshold. Only droughts that last longer than six-months were taken into account in the analysis.

#### How are the indicators land area affected by droughts and number of people exposed to droughts calculated?

To estimate the land area affected by and population exposed to drought we checked for each year whether a grid cell was exposed for at least one period of prolonged drought. If so, the grid cell is accounted as ‘being exposed to drought’ for that respective year. We then calculate the total land area affected by drought for {country.name} by adding up all 0.5 degree x 0.5 degree grid cells belonging to {country.name}. To calculate the number of people exposed to droughts, we first multiply the each grid cell by the number of people living in that grid cell to estimate the number of people exposed to droughts, and then add up those numbers across all grid cells belonging to {country.name}.

#### What else should I know about the methodology?

We assume that the number of people living in an area, as well as the area’s land use and land cover (what fractions of the area are used for settlement, cropland, or pasture, or covered by forest), remain constant at the levels of year 2005 throughout the whole simulation. This is not meant to be realistic, but to isolate the influence of climate change from the influence of other changes.

In the key messages we report the results for the median (the model in the middle) of the group of global hydrological models that ran simulations in (link: glossary/isimip2b text: ISIMIP2b). All model-specific results are presented in the figures and a discussion of the limitations of the analysis is included at the end of the report.

A ranking of countries for each indicator is also provided to compare countries on the basis of their relative change in land area affected or number of people exposed under different levels of global warming and for various time horizons, compared to conditions without climate change. A ranking of 1 implies that the country experiences a change in the indicator higher than all other ranked countries, for example the strongest impacts from climate change; whereas a lower ranking entails comparatively less impacts.

### Discussion

The model simulations used for this report build on science that has been established through many peer-reviewed studies: for example by [Sheffield and Wood (2008)](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00382-007-0340-z), [Trenberth, et al. (2014)](https://www.nature.com/articles/nclimate2067), [Berg, et al. (2017)](https://doi.org/10.1002/2016GL071921), and [Berg and Sheffield (2018)](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40641-018-0095-0).

Models are simplified representations of reality, hence model simulations come with limitations and uncertainties that have to be kept in mind. Using multiple global hydrological models with different representations and parameterizations of the hydrological components and processes may introduce biases in the estimation of soil moisture conditions and in the resulting assessment of droughts ([Veldkamp et al., 2018](https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aab96f)). Examples are the representation of evapotranspiration within global hydrological models and the representation of soil water column.

Different global hydrological models apply different methods to estimate (link: glossary/potential-evapotranspiraton text: (potential) evapotranspiration). These vary from the (link: glossary/bulk-formula text: Bulk formula) and the (link: glossary/monin-obukhov-similarity-theory text: Monin-Obukhov similarity theory) to (link: glossary/penman-montheith text: Penman-Montheith), (link: glossary/hamon text: Hamon), and (link: glossary/priestley-taylor text: Priestley-Taylor). In result, estimates of (potential) evapotranspiration can differ significantly across models despite having used uniform inputs from the global climate models. This may affect estimates of soil moistures conditions. Another challenge lies in the representation of how vegetation cover affects evapotranspiration, a relationship that is subject to change within a given river basin, or with rising temperature and CO2 levels. For example, the effect of CO2 fertilization – the phenomenon through which photosynthesis, hence plant growth, should be enhanced in a CO2-richer atmosphere – is not represented in most global hydrological models although it would affect the plants’ water use, with significant consequences for soil moisture conditions and drought estimates.

Using multiple global hydrological models with different representations of the soil water column introduces additional biases in the estimation of soil moisture conditions and droughts. The global hydrological models applied here include a  different numbers of soil compartments with varying depths of their soil water layer(s). These representations range from one soil water layer with a depth of between 0.1 - 4 meter up to 15 fully resolved soil water layers with a total depth up to 45 meter. When directly provided by the global hydrological models, we use here root zone soil moisture as an input for our drought assessment. For global hydrological models that did not provide root zone soil moisture directly, we approximated this variable by integrating soil moisture across multiple soil water layers in order to reach a depth of ~1 meter. Differences in the representation of the soil column and soil water processes can lead to significant differences in estimates of soil water availability, soil water saturation and drought conditions.

The performance of the global hydrological models can be tested by using (link: glossary/observed-historical-weather-information text: observed historical weather information) as inputs, and comparing the simulated soil moisture to soil moisture observations, locally measured or remotely sensed.

Apparent conflicting results of how droughts develop due climate change highlight the sensitivity of drought estimates to the choice of indicator and hydrological variable used ([Trenberth, et al. (2014)](https://www.nature.com/articles/nclimate2067), [Berg, et al. (2017)](https://doi.org/10.1002/2016GL071921)). Here, we use a variable monthly percentile threshold in combination with root zone soil moisture conditions to distinguish drought conditions from no drought conditions. Alternative indicators representing soil moisture droughts, such as the (link: glossary/palmer-drought-severity-index text: Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI)), the (link: glossary/standardized-soil-moisture-index text: Standardized Soil Moisture Index (SSMI)), or indicators representing a different part of the (link: glossary/hydrological-cycle text: hydrological cycle) (for example the (link: glossary/standardized-precipitation-index text: standardized precipitation index (SPI)), the (link: glossary/standardized-precipitation-and-evapotranspiration-index text: standardized precipitation and evapotranspiration index (SPEI)), or the (link: glossary/standardized-runoff-index text: standardized runoff index (SRI))) may result in different conclusions on the absolute and relative changes in land area affected by and population exposed to drought due to climate change.

The presented drought projections reflect the isolated effect of climate change, while their local manifestations are expected to also be influenced by direct human drivers like changes in land use, land cover, and irrigation. The representation of these drivers is limited to (link: glossary/present-day-conditions text: present-day conditions), while their future changes are not explicitly modelled in the presented simulations. This serves the purpose of isolating the effect of anthropogenic climate change from other factors, but it means that actual drought exposure in the future could be more or less acute, depending on non-climatic human drivers, such as irrigation or adaptation.

Regarding climate models and global hydrological models, it is known that generally both types of models contribute substantially to the overall spread in projected climate change impacts on water-related variables. Because this report presents the results of a combination of climate models and global hydrological models that ran simulations based on the same experiment protocol, and whose outputs are thus directly comparable, it captures at least some of this spread in the projections.